When I travelled through Europe, I was in awe of all the amazing sights: Big Ben and the Tower Bridge in London, the Sagrada Familia in Barcelona, and the gothic cathedrals of Italy. It all was so breathtaking that humans could create these majestic buildings that had stood the test of time. However, not all of the sights were stunning in a positive way. In addition to the impressive sights, I saw the cities’ public sanitation workers wage war against the towers of trash locals and tourists constructed around each trash can. In walking from site to site, my path weaved around piles of cans and bottles placed haphazardly along the sidewalks. I could always tell I was on the right path toward a tourist destination because I saw the heaps of waste grow in size: a sign of more travelers. I was stunned that humans could create these plastic items that could stand the test of time, or, at least until they were moved to a landfill. 
	Seeing all of this on my travels had me thinking about the environmental initiatives like paper straws, bamboo cutlery, and especially, the shift to bioplastics. Why did I not see more of those biodegradable items in the trash rather than the plastic bottles that would look untouched after 100 years? What destroyed the hype and the drive toward these environmental initiatives? Why do companies not prioritize the use of biodegradable, eco-friendly materials over the generally negative “forever plastics?” Shouldn’t forward-thinking and ideas of innovation cause them to consider more eco-friendly options? Is it a customer preference or a company production choice? To start answering some of these questions, I will investigate this topic through the specific view of bioplastics. I plan to look at their emergence and rise, their feasibility to be used by companies, and factors stopping their widespread acceptance and use. 
	Firstly, it is important to define a bioplastic. Alberto Di Bartolo and his team of researchers at the University of Palermo define a bioplastic as “meet[ing] any of two criteria: the polymer is bio-based, [and] the polymer is biodegradable” (Di Bartolo et al). This means that not all bioplastics are compostable; rather, the plastic can have a biological origin, a biological destination, or both. For this paper, I will be investigating bioplastics that are both manufactured from biomass and biodegradable. Some main examples of these plastics are polylactic acid (PLA), polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), and starch-based plastics. 
	The efficacy of bioplastics (and all plastics) is determined through a test of measurements known as a Life Cycle Assessment. The European Environment Agency defines a Life Cycle Assessment as a “process of evaluating the effects that a product has on the environment over the entire period of its life.” Life Cycle Assessments can be used to track a product’s environmental effect or functional ability (European Environment Agency). Di Bartolo claims that a complete Life Cycle Assessment of bioplastics should consider all possible places of use or impact: what economic statuses change, how society is affected, what effect it has on the environment, and more (Di Bartolo et al). While it is typical to think of how effective bioplastics are based on how easily they replace oil-based plastics, using a Life Cycle Assessment is a better source of replacement as it considers all impacts a material for products has on the world as a whole. For example, Jim Robbins, a scientific journalist for the New York Times, reports that “Neither [PLA or PHA] is widely used, however, because they simply don’t compare to the strength and other properties of traditional plastic, and they cost substantially more” (Robbins). Robbins makes his judgment on bioplastics solely based on their ability to replace oil-based plastics and costs without taking into account the other factors of compostability and environmental consequences. Therefore, when considering the feasibility of bioplastics, it is important to consider all of their impacts.
	In my research, I found something I believe to be contrary to popular opinion: bioplastics do not solely provide positive effects. While they are manufactured from biological sources, they still have the ability to increase global warming potential and take large energy costs to recycle or manage composting and landfilling. Di Bartolo compiles Life Cycle Assessment research on bioplastics and draws the following conclusions: Advantages of switching to bioplastics include a decreased fossil fuel dependency, a lessened global warming potential, and a beneficial return on investment of soil nutrient chemicals. Disadvantages include higher production and manufacturing costs, possible competition with the food industry, and an uncertainty in biodegradability in variable environments (Di Bartolo et al). While bioplastics are presented as a better alternative to plastics made with fossil fuels, switching is not a solution with only gain. However, Phil Rosenow, Doctor of Theoretical Chemistry at the Fraunhofer Institute for Process Engineering and Packaging, and his team offer means to lessen the negative impacts. Rosenow advocates that the design stage is integral to the overall impact of the bioplastic. He remarks that “a minimalistic [bioplastic] packaging has a lower environmental footprint by itself and is more suitable for recycling; on the other hand, the functional properties…must be guaranteed” (Rosenow et al). Rosenow says that designers are responsible for deciding where on the spectrum between a perfectly eco-friendly model and an idealistically functional product. Therefore, it is up to the design of the plastic item to determine what its overall positive and negative impacts are. 
	In the course of a product’s life, plastics are famous (or sometimes infamous) for having durability and longevity, where only harsher chemical environments can break them down. They have gained the nickname “forever plastics” due to their ability to appear untouched after long periods of time. From this, I chose to look at bioplastics’ ability to biodegrade and see whether it had its own challenges associated with it. My research concluded that this special quality can pose a challenge to implementation and use. One of the benefits of bioplastics over oil-based plastics is the ability to decompose, but this is a challenge designers have to confront when creating products. E. S. Stevens, a late professor of chemistry at SUNY Binghamton, looks into the factors of biodegradability in his book Green Plastics. “Biopolymers are often hydrophilic, as opposed to hydrophobic, and some are even soluble in hot water. The hydrophilicity of starch is especially significant…Its hydrophilicity is the major barrier to its becoming a dominant bioplastic material” (Stevens 140). He claims that one of the reasons bioplastics are able to decompose–their ability to dissolve in water–is also one of the biggest obstacles for more widespread adoption. Stevens continues, mentioning that chemical modifications can cause some bioplastics to become more water resistant, but he concedes the point that the treated and more hydrophobic bioplastics then become too expensive to contend with oil-based plastics. He mentions costs further, saying that novel processing methods are needed to bring down costs, but that investment will be slow as there is not as extensive of a market for bioplastics as there is for oil-based plastics (Stevens 141). Companies will slowly research, experiment, and invest cautiously, but until capital is acquired, standardization of bioplastics to meet the qualifications of oil-based plastics will be unrushed. Stevens concludes his point by considering bioplastics to be in a loop of waiting and maturing, noting that “[t]o develop extensive markets one needs low-cost products. To achieve low-cost products, one needs large-scale production and extensive markets” (Stevens 144). Their adoption needs a breakthrough in ability or production for them to be seriously considered by companies. As a result, bioplastics’ biggest benefit, biodegradability, costs them their chance to be endorsed and implemented by companies. 
	When thinking of plastics, a related topic that comes to my mind is recycling. I thought it would be important to consider the ease and ability to recycle both bioplastics and oil-based plastics in this argument, as better recycling practices might reduce the need for biodegradability. This disposal is usually categorized into four distinct categories: mechanical recycling, chemical recycling, discarding into a landfill, and, with the advent of bioplastics, composting. Kim Ragaert, researcher at Ghent University, and her team define mechanical and chemical recycling. Mechanical recycling uses physical means, like grinding and washing, to convert the used plastic into fresh material. Chemical recycling converts the plastic into smaller molecules to reform into fresh material (Ragaert et al). Rosenow’s research into Life Cycle Assessments highlights the end-of-life stage and draws conclusions on properties of recycling as well as world impact. He observes that chemical recycling is overall more expensive than mechanical recycling due to the energy costs; mechanical recycling had less of an environmental impact than chemical recycling or landfilling; composting is considered an inferior option to recycling as it produces no output; and transportation of the waste plastic generally causes more impact than the waste management itself (Rosenow et al). Overall, from this data, it should seem obvious that mechanical recycling is the best plan of action against waste bioplastics. Rosenow stresses that point, arguing that we already have infrastructure in place for oil-based plastic-recycling, and that “a correct waste collection and management is required to solve the environmental troubles arising from…both petroleum-based and bio-based plastics” (Rosenow et al). This correct waste management tackles the last point from Rosenow’s conclusions, that transport is impactful. A sustainable waste management system would allow for benefits all around; landfills would benefit as recycling would be more prevalent, companies would benefit as recycled material would lessen the amount of new material they need to buy, and the world would benefit as uncontrolled dumps and waste pile ups would be controlled. The end-of-life stage for bioplastics is more positive than that of oil-based plastics due to their ability to be recycled; however, for the world to take full benefit, substantial investment would need to be made into waste infrastructure. 
	Customers and companies are still forming their opinions and views on bioplastics. Robbins investigates company and consumer policies through the lens of Coca-Cola’s PlantBottle, a soda bottle made of up to 30 percent bioplastics. He provides a dissident view to bioplastics, saying that they are currently more of a marketing gimmick than a real solution as of now, and that the general people’s idea of how eco-friendly bioplastics are is romanticized. In his article, he remarks that bioplastics are only considered ideally biodegradable in controlled composting environments (Robbins). Robbins comes to the same conclusion as Rosenow in that the true solution to plastic problems as a whole is the conjoined implementation of bioplastics along with an overhaul of waste management. Robbins also makes the claim that companies use confusing language for their marketing. “They use the popular, if vague, terms ‘plant-based’ or ‘bio-based’-or compostable’” (Robbins). He reasons that companies are masking the problem by using this practice of confusing advertising, doing more harm than good. Instead, companies need to be participating in the advancement of bioplastic research and waste system overhaul for their benefit as well as the benefit of the world. 
Consumer behavior is also important to take into account. Not all consumers necessarily care about the materials of their products; rather, they want to feel good and secure about the purchases they make. Klaus Grunert, Professor of Management at the Aarhus University, researches customer behavior in his research titled “Sustainability in the Food Sector: A Consumer Behaviour Perspective.” While his research is on consumer choices of sustainable products in general (not related to bioplastics directly), he draws conclusions on customer behavior that are relevant. Grunert provides six barriers to consumers choosing sustainable products, but the relevant ones are misunderstanding the product’s benefits and a raised price due to the difference in material. Customers have become so used to “normal” products that any differentiator will jump out at them, especially qualities like “organic,” “eco-friendly,” and “sustainable.” Therefore, customers will choose products made with bioplastics just because of the novelty and the problem they believe it solves (Grunert). This buying behavior will tell companies that the idea of being more environmentally-conscious is good enough for business; they do not need to move forward with other environment-focused business practices or initiatives. Grunert also sees other consumers viewing the sustainable buzzwords and immediately searching for the price. In these cases, he finds the benefit of the product is not enough to entice the customer; rather, they buy the generic product with less sustainable origins (Grunert). Companies see what has been proven by every economics class: consumers want to buy the least expensive product that meets their needs. Since they don’t value sustainability as much as the cost they save, customers will choose the cheaper product. In addition, companies cannot reduce the prices of their products with bioplastics due to the intrinsic expenses of having less infrastructure in-place for their production and disposal. This causes a loop where companies are more hesitant to adopt bioplastics on a wide scale. These overall misconceptions or valuations by customers over the bioplastic products motivate company behavior against implementing them as the businesses see no personal benefit to themselves; customers will continue to buy the products already in place. 
From all of my research, I found that bioplastics are hindered in their acceptance and adoption due to many economic factors. I investigated their aspect in product design, how their plans impact their overall impact on the many aspects of the world. I looked at the positives and negatives of their biodegradability, a quality most people assume to be strictly positive. While their tendency to decompose is a good quality in cases where they are dumped in landfills, it limits their lifespan and areas of application due to tendencies to react with water. To give them equal footing with the characteristics of oil plastics, they become more expensive and less attractive to producers. I also explored bioplastics’ recyclability and found that mechanical recycling is the best course of action, where the material is simply reshaped into a form that can be molded into a new product. However, to implement this on a scale to compete with the world’s plastic consumption and waste expulsion, a redesign of our world’s waste management would need to take place first. Finally, I looked at bioplastics from the viewpoints of customers and companies. Customer behavior showed tendencies of either misunderstanding the benefit of supporting bioplastics or choosing oil-based plastic products due to their cheaper cost. This influences companies to settle with their current products as there is not enough of a demand to make a major shift toward more sustainable production. Overall, bioplastics have not reached a level of usability comparable with oil-based plastics due to a lack of infrastructure and customer beliefs, and therefore are not adopted as replacement. 
After this research, I am curious what can be reasonably done to promote their use. While adjusting manufacturing and waste management practices is too large of a task for individuals to take on, it would be worthwhile investigating more into customer behavior and seeing how we can inform people to make more sustainable choices when buying plastic products. If done correctly and on a large enough scale, companies would surely take notice and maybe even join in on the quest for replacing our dated oil-based plastic world with a modern, sustainable bioplastic future.
